In this report, I have investigated the use of static analysis techniques for
optimising TESLA assertions. My implementation of a model checker for TESLA is
able to correctly check a useful subset of its assertions. Additionally, I have
shown significant performance improvements that allow TESLA to be used in
contexts it would not previously have been feasible to.

As well as my work on static analysis, I have contributed to the understanding
and usage of TESLA in general---the model checker can be used to produce
counterexamples to a TESLA assertion, and I provide a collection of programs
that demonstrate how TESLA can be used to model temporal properties of a data
structure. Future work on TESLA (whether in the context of static analysis or
otherwise) will benefit from these improvements, as well as from the concrete
improvements to the TESLA implementation and documentation I have contributed.

The model checker itself constitutes an explicit formalisation of the underlying
principles of TESLA, along with novel algorithms for proving properties of
control flow that depend partially on data flow. I have identified ways in which
future work could extend these techniques to prove stronger properties.

An initial goal of the project was to provide a TESLA model of a network
protocol implementation. While this goal was not fully successful, the insights
gained from the investigation itself are a useful contribution in their own
right---I have described features of source code that are hostile to TESLA
instrumentation and static analysis, and introduced a characterisation of
scenarios in which TESLA can be usefully applied.

Motivated by this characterisation of the effective use of TESLA, I demonstrate
a framework by which library developers can more reliably enforce temporal
properties on usages of their library code. This is the first instance of a
generic application of TESLA. The performance improvements made possible through
the use of static analysis are an important part of this contribution.
